Alright, let's break down Congenital
Diphragmatic Hernia,
or CDH, in a way that actually sticks for
boards
and clinical practice.
CDH is a neonatal emergency where there's
a defect in the diaphragm,
most commonly on the left side, allowing
abdominal organs to
move into the chest.
That sounds simple, but the consequences
are severe.
When those organs occupy the thoracic
space, they compress the
developing lungs.
The result is pulmonary hypoplasia,
meaning fewer,
smaller alveoli, and abnormal pulmonary
vasculature.
So what does that lead to?
Two major problems, impaired oxygenation
and persistent pulmonary hypertension of
the newborn, or PPHN.
These babies aren't just struggling to
breathe, they're struggling to
oxygenate because blood is being shunted
away from the lungs.
Clinically, you'll often see severe
respiratory distress immediately after birth.
Look for a scaphoid abdomen, because the
organs aren't in
the abdomen, and decreased or absent
breath sounds on the
affected side.
These are big board clues.
Now here's a critical RT point.
Bag mask ventilation is contraindicated.
Why?
Because you'll push air into the stomach
and intestines, worsening
lung compression.
Instead, immediate endotracheal intubation
is the priority.
Once intubated, management focuses on
gentle ventilation strategies.
We want to avoid barotrauma, because these
lungs are already
underdeveloped.
That often means low pressures, permissive
hypercapnia,
and careful monitoring.
Many of these patients will require
high-frequency ventilation or even ECMO if conventional
support fails.
You'll also see a nasogastric or
orogastric tube placed early for gastric decompression,
another key intervention to reduce
pressure in the thorax.
Surgical repair is necessary, but not
immediately.
The priority is stabilization, especially
managing pulmonary hypertension and oxygenation
before going to the OR.
So here's your board takeaway.
CDH equals pulmonary hypoplasia plus
pulmonary hypertension.
No bag mask ventilation, early intubation,
gentle ventilation, gastric decompression,
and stabilize
before surgery.
If you remember that cause right-pointing
arrow, effect right-
pointing arrow, intervention flow, you'll
not
only pass the exam, you'll manage these
patients safely in
real life.